                             I N T E L I B   
                    source files attribution policy

                               Copyright (c) Andrey Vikt. Stolyarov, 2010
*************************************************************************
* 1. Introduction


As InteLib becomes a real open project developed by multiple authors, the
question arises how the files of which the library consists should be
attributed.

There's an opinion that files as such can hold no attribution at all,
leaving all the "official" problems to these upper-case-named files within
the root directory of the project, named COPYRIGHT, COPYING, LICENSE,
WARRANTY and so on.  This perfectly fits the Linus Torvalds' concept
expressed in one well-known phrase: "write code, not law".  However, before
we adopt this "simplified" policy we must first agree that the library as a
whole is owned by some "entity" such as "InteLib team" or whatever... or,
as an alternative, we can agree to transfer all the copyrights to a single
person.  In this case we really can disregard the fact that, after all,
each of the files of the library has its own list of real authors and, by
the way, can be potentially found useful outside of the project.

Well... Okay, let me just say I'm not ready to transfer my rights to any
entity such as "InteLib team", I'm only ready to license the library (under
GNU [L]GPL), but not to give away my rights as such.  Sorry guys if someone
finds this not good, but the things are just as they are.  From the other
hand, I find it inconvenient to ask others on the team to transfer their
rights to me (why should I, after all? I don't pay them money!)

By the way, even if we could agree to do one of the two abovementioned
things, it could help us not to place copyright notices on each of the
files, but wouldn't excuse us from the authorship attribution such as
"written by...", "modified by...", etc.  Moral rights, including the
authorship, can not be transferred.

So, being the owner of most of the code, I decided to leave the things to
go along their most natural way: let each contributor keep his/her rights
to the code they write.  Hence, every source file in the project must have
the comment in it's first lines, which displays the appropriate copyright
notices.  BTW, most of the known open source projects do the same, so we're
not inventing any new wheels.



*************************************************************************
* 2.  What does it mean to keep your copyright


First of all, don't forget the library is licensed under LGPL, and some
parts of it are even licensed under strict GPL.  This actually means you
can *NOT* license files you contribute to the library under any other
licenses;  if your file becomes a part of the library, it automatically
falls under one of these licenses (if you don't agree, the only option for
you is not to contribute anything to the library).  Okay, there are lots of
detailed explanation of all these around, search the Internet for them if
you need.

This can make a (false) feeling that copyright is not a big deal, as the
soft is GPLed anyway.  However, this is not _exactly_ true.  If you hold
the copyright on some work, you actually have more rights than any person
who uses the same work under the license.  Unlike your users, you, as the
copyright owner, can license the work not only under GPL but under any
other license, if you decide so.  Okay, if there is a group work and there
are other copyright owners, you must either establish an agreement with
them, or get rid of their copyrighted material before you do so, but you
still can.

Keep this in mind.

Certainly, the copyright sign as such is only a sign which says "Hey, this
is mine!" (BTW, it does NOT mean -- as such -- "I wrote this" or smth.
alike, copyright means property ownership, not authorship or any other
moral rights).  However, your rights exist without any such signs, and no
signs can affect your rights, as well as the rights of others.  So, if you
misplace the copyright sign, you thereby only misinform the public, and
nothing else -- as nothing really changes from the legal point of view.
So, please always be accurate and make sure you place all the copyright
notices exactly where they belong.  Really, you don't want to misinform
anyone, do you? 



*************************************************************************
* 3.  When you become the copyright holder and what exactly do you own


Well, any work you do, provided that the work is "state-of-the-art" (okay,
I don't know what is it, exactly, but I know for sure any programming is),
you automatically become the author of it and the copyright owner of it,
unless you've got some legally effective deal with someone else, which
takes your rights away from you and gives them to that person/entity.  Such
a thing usually happens when you work for some company as a programmer, in
this case you still become the author, but not the copyright holder:
rather, the company does.  However, this doesn't apply to the case of
InteLib.  Well... make sure you don't work on you contributions to InteLib
when you're at work, if you're a programmer -- you understand why, don't
you?

So, the simplest situation is when you just write a file which didn't
exist before.  In this case, you're the only copyright owner of it.

When you modify someone else's work, the situation complicates a bit.
You've got the right on the changes you made, but the original author
remains to be the owner of the things which didn't change.  So, who is the
owner of the file?  The answer is: you both.  You place your copyright
notice in the file, but you must keep the original copyright notice intact.
BTW, both GPL and common sense require you make it clear what changes
exactly do you apply.  It is nothing special to have more than one owner.
Hmmm, I'm nearly sure you saw such situations before.

If you only make minor changes, you can gracefully acknowledge this fact
writing "Portions copyright" instead of just "Copyright".  Legally
speaking, this doesn't make a difference, but is still appreciated.

If your changes are so major that only some little pieces remain original,
then you still can NOT (!) change the original copyright notice, but you
can put your notice at the first place, appending smth. like "based on the
work by...", and then the original copyright notice, which must remain
unchanged.

The last possibility is when you rework the file so completely that you're
absolutely sure no single piece of original code is still there.  In this
case, you can remove the original copyright: effectively, this is not a
"derived work", but rather a "completely new work".



*************************************************************************
* 4.  Formal rules


4.1.  The attribution comment's placement and structure


The comment containing the attribution MUST start from exactly the first
line of the file; the only exception is made for interpreted scripts where
the first line must set the interpreter; in this case, the attribution
comment should start within the first 10 lines of the file, and before
anything which can technically be moved down.

If the file is a C++ source (.cpp, .hpp or whatever), '//' comments are
used.  If the file can be used as a plain C source (e.g. it is a header to
be included from plain C files, traditional /* */ comments are used, with
both '/*' and '*/' on their own lines, and all the lines within the comment
prenended with ' *' (space-asterisk), so that all the asterisks form a
column.  For sources in other languages, the appropriate line-comment
tokens are to be used, e.g., ';' in Lisp, '#' in makefiles, and so on.

In the examples below, the C++-style comment signs are used.

The first line of the comment must be formed of the name of InteLib and the
URL of the official site: http://www.intelib.org, with such an amount of
spaces between them so the URL is ended exactly on the (67+N)th position on
the screen, where N is the length of the comment token (2 for C++, 1 for
Lisp, etc) -- so that the last char ('g' in 'org') is located in the same
column with the exclamation sign withis the warranty disclaimer (see
below).  So, the line will look like this:

//  InteLib                                    http://www.intelib.org

The next line should display the name of the file as a path related to the
InteLib's project root, e.g.:

//  The file sexpress/sexpress.hpp

You can add an optional description of the file, indented with four spaces,
e.g:

//  The file sexpress/sexpress.hpp
//      definitions of basic S-expression classes

The decription is optional and can be omited.  Either way, there must be a
blank line after that.

Next, the copyright notice(s) follow.  If there are more than one notice,
please do NOT separate them with any blank lines.  Another TWO blank lines
are left after the last copyright notice.  See below for guidelines on
forming the copyright notice.

After that, exactly the following text must appear:

//  This is free software, licensed under GNU LGPL v.2.1
//  See the file COPYING for further details.
//
//  THERE IS NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESSED, IMPLIED OR WHATEVER!
//  Please see the file WARRANTY for the detailed explanation.

Whenever applicable, 'GNU LGPL v.2.1' must be replaced with
'GNU GPL v.2'.  



4.2.  The copyright notice structure


Basically speaking, a copyright notice must consit of the following:

  - the word 'Copyright', or words 'Portions copyright', whichever fits
    better;
  - the sign '(c)' (please do NOT use the non-ascii character which
    displays 'c' within the circle; don't use non-ascii characters in
    programs at all, I mean, never);
  - the author's name, followed by the comma character;
  - the two years: first is when the work was first created, and the second
    is when it was last modified.  If it is the same year, it appears only
    once.  If the two years are sequential, they're separated with a comma,
    otherwise they're separated with the dash.

Here are some examples:

//  Copyright (c) John The Programmer, 2007
//  Copyright (c) Ivan Ivanovich Ivanov, 2007,2008
//  Portions copyright (c) Joe The Hacker, 2001-2010

You may add an explanation of your changes right after your own copyright
notice, indented with four spaces, e.g.:

//  Copyright (c) John D. Doe, 2010
//      Added the class LExpressionJondDoeCoolExpression

Such an explanation right in the copyright notice is neither obligatory nor
encouragted, though.  Better use comments later in the file to mark your
changes.


4.3. When and how do you place and modify the copyright notices


Forst of all, PLEASE MAKE A DECISION HOW EXACTLY YOUR NAME IS TO APPEAR IN
THE COPYRIGHT NOTICES and always use that particular representation.  Do
not change the case of chars, do not add or remove dots after initials (you
can use a dot, or you can decide not to, but please be consistent), do not
add or remove spaces, etc.  If you use a nickname, please use the same one
every time.  Either use quote signs for the nickname, or not, but do the
same every time.  This is because there are some cases when we might need
to grep on for files copyrighted by a particular person. 

If you're creating a new file, place the notice with your name and with the
current year.

If you're changing a file in which there's only YOUR copyright notice,
please check the years, and ajust them if needed.  Never change the first
year, but replace the last year with the current one if it is different.

If you're changing a file in which there are some others' copyright
notices, please leave them all as they are, NOT TOUCHING THE YEARS! -- but
add your own copyright notice, too, with the current year.  You MAY use
'Portions copyright' instead of just 'Copyright' in case you decide so.
Be sure to add some comments (_below_ the main attribution comment) to
identify your contribution to the file, with dates.  Such comments must be
sorted by date, latest first.

If there are some other's copyright notices as well as our own, already,
then check the years of YOUR notice (but not the others') and adjust, if
needed.  Be sure to update the comments that identify the changes of
different contributors so that it remains clear what you did.

If you are creating another file (that is, under another name) but it is
based on the previously existed file copyrighted by someone else, please
add the line 'Based on the file originally named NNNNNNN' right before the
original copyright notices, and only then add your own copyright notice.
This is the only case when a blank line should be left between the original
notices and your own notice.

The last question is what to do if there's no copyright notice in the file
you're editing.  Hmm, first of all, this should never happen.  It's a kind
of accident.  The right thing to do is to ask guys around for some
information about who is the author.  Once the author is identified, ask
him/her to add the appropriate notice to the file; then, add your notice in
the usual manner.

If (and only if) you *really* have no time to investigate, than leave the
file just as is.  Please note that in this case you can't place your
copyright notice: really, you're not the only author, so the file
displaying only one notice would misinform the public.  No information is
better than wrong information.
